Angular DI post (#1277)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2022-09-21-angular-dependency-injection.md

---
layout: blog_post
title: "Practical Usages of Dependency Injection in Angular"
author: alisa-duncan
by: advocate
communities: [javascript]
description: "Angular's Dependency Injection is powerful, but complex. In this post, we'll demystify configuring providers in Angular and look at practical examples of using Angular's DI system."
tags: [angular, javascript, typescript]
tweets:
- "Check out this quick overview of Angular's Dependency Injection system for practical examples of how to configure providers! 👀"
image: blog/angular-dependency-injection/social.jpg
type: awareness
---

> Angular has an extensive system to add and configure dependencies to the application called providers. When doing this, you use the built-in Dependency Injection (DI) system. This post will cover Angular's powerful DI system at a high level and demonstrate a few practical usages of configuring your dependencies. Let's get practical!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Angular has an extensive system that uses *providers" to add and configure dependencies to the application you're building. To create providers, you use the built-in Dependency Injection (DI) system. This post will cover Angular's powerful DI system at a high level and demonstrate a few practical use cases and strategies for configuring your dependencies. Let's get practical!
```
 I tried to clarify this opener, but hopefully I didn't misinterpret or change your meaning.

{% include toc.md %}

## Quick overview of Dependency Injection

> Dependency Injection decouples the creation of a dependency from using the dependency. Doing so promotes loose coupling within our code, a foundation for creating well-architected software. When we use DI, we follow a design principle called Dependency Inversion. Dependency Inversion is a core tenant of software design principles. It's so integral that if you've heard of the acronym **SOLID** to describe good coding practices, Dependency Inversion represents the letter **D** in the acronym. Following the [SOLID design practices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOLID) yields flexible, maintainable software that allows our applications to grow with new features more quickly. And by using DI, we can change the dependent code without changing the consuming code, which is pretty cool! This is nearly impossible with tightly coupled code, where you might have to touch everything to make a small change!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dependency Injection decouples the creation of a dependency from using that dependency. This promotes loose coupling within our code, a foundation for creating well-architected software. When we use DI, we follow a design principle called Dependency Inversion. Dependency Inversion is a core tenet of software design principles. It's so integral that it's part of the acronym **SOLID**, used to describe design patterns for good coding practices. Dependency Inversion represents the letter **D** in the acronym. Following [SOLID design practices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOLID) yields flexible, maintainable software that allows our applications to grow with new features more quickly. And by using DI, we can change the dependent code without changing the consuming code, which is pretty cool! This is nearly impossible with tightly coupled code, where you might have to touch everything to make a small change.
```
Note: tenet vs tenant (https://www.merriam-webster.com/words-at-play/tenant-vs-tenet-difference-usage#)

The cool thing is Angular has DI built-in and helps set us up for success. How handy!

## Angular's Dependency Injection system

When you use the Angular CLI to generate a service, it automatically adds the code to register the service within Angular's DI system. That's what the `@Injectable()` TypeScript decorator does:

```ts
@Injectable({
  providedIn: 'root'
})
export class MyService {
}
```

Without doing anything else, we can use our dependency in the application by injecting it into the consuming code as a constructor parameter:

```ts
@Component({
  // standard component metadata here
})
export class MyComponent {
  constructor(private myService: MyService) { }
}
```

In Angular v14, you now have a new option to use the `inject()` function.

> Another way to register dependencies is manually providing them through the `providers` array. Different Angular building blocks accept `providers` in the metadata. So you can register a provider like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another way to register dependencies is to provide them manually through the `providers` array. Different Angular building blocks accept `providers` in the metadata. So you can register a provider like this:
```

```ts
@NgModule({
  imports: // stuff here
  declarations: // stuff here
  providers: [
    MyService
  ]
})
export class AppModule {
}
```

There's something else to note, though. Angular's DI system allows you to provide a dependency to different places within the application. While this sounds unnecessarily complicated, it allows you to fine-tune which dependency to use in your consuming code. You can configure the `providers` array in other modules and Angular building blocks, such as components and directives. You'll get the provider you configured closest to the consuming code when you do so.

Now that we have a quick overview of how to provide dependencies, let's review an integral piece of Angular's DI system, Injection Tokens.

> ## Injection Tokens in Angular

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Injection tokens in Angular
```

Injection tokens allow us to have values and objects as dependencies. This means we can depend on a string, such as "Hello world!", and objects, which include configuration objects and global variables such as Web APIs. But injection tokens are even more remarkable because we can also create dependencies to constructs that don't have a runtime definition, such as interfaces! Let's take a look at an example using an injection token.

Let's say we want to have a dependency on the bread emoji. You can create the bread emoji, register the token to Angular's DI system, and set up a default value like this:

```ts
const export BREAD_TOKEN = new InjectionToken<string>('bread', {
  providedIn: 'root',
  factory: () => '🍞'
});
```

When you want to use the `BREAD_TOKEN`, you'd use the `Inject` decorator:

```ts
@Component({
  // standard component metadata here
})
export class MyBreadComponent {
  constructor(@Inject(BREAD_TOKEN) private bread: string) { }
}
```

> Now we can access the 🍞emoji from within the component! This might not seem like a big deal, but having injection tokens as a means to represent values and interfaces as dependencies is enormous! And it sets us up to leverage the power of Angular's DI system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can access the 🍞 emoji from within the component! This might not seem like a big deal, but having injection tokens as a means to represent values and interfaces as dependencies is enormous! And it sets us up to leverage the power of Angular's DI system.
```
added a space

> Leveraging Angular's DI system leads us into fine-grain control of providers by using injection tokens along with configuring providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Leveraging Angular's DI system gives us fine-grained control of providers by using injection tokens along with configuring providers.
```
simpler?

## Configuring providers in Angular's Dependency Injection system

> You can configure the `providers` array to add fine-grained control to your providers. When combined with injection tokens, we can unleash a lot of power. Before trying to wield that much power, it's essential to know when it makes sense to unleash that kind of power. Always prefer the most straightforward, default way of registering a dependency and then use the fine-grain control as needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure the `providers` array to add fine-grained control to your providers. When combined with injection tokens, we can unleash a lot of power. But first, it's essential to know when it makes sense to use that kind of power. Always prefer the most straightforward, default way of registering a dependency and then use fine-grained control as needed.
```
streamline

To configure the `providers` array, you add an object containing the instructions like this:

```ts
@NgModule({
  imports: // stuff here
  declarations: // stuff here
  providers: [
    { provide: MyService, howToProvide?: OtherDependency }
  ]
})
export class AppModule {
}
```

> The "how to provide" gives Angular-specific instructions on this dependency configuration. Then you can provide the new other dependency. Angular supports the following options for "how to provide":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "how to provide" gives Angular-specific instructions on this dependency configuration. Then you can provide the other new dependency. Angular supports the following options for "how to provide":
```
adjective sequence

1. `useClass` - Replace the current dependency with a new instance of something else
2. `useExisting` - Replace the current dependency with an existing dependency
3. `useValue` - Replace the current dependency with a new value
4. `useFactory` - Use a factory method to determine which dependency to use based on a dynamic value

Next, let's walk through examples of each configuration option to understand how to use them.

### Configure providers with `useClass`

> The useClass option replaces the current dependency with a new instance of another class. This is a great option to use if you're refactoring code and want to substitute a different dependency in your application quickly. Let's say you have a language learning app and an Angular service that wraps authentication. We'll call this service `AuthService`, and the code looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `useClass` option replaces the current dependency with a new instance of another class. This is a great option to use if you're refactoring code and want to substitute a different dependency in your application quickly. Let's say you have a language learning app and an Angular service that wraps authentication. We'll call this service `AuthService`, and the code looks like this:
```

  public login(): void { }
  public logout(): void { }
}
```

In a stroke of luck, a large tech company decides to buy your language learning app, but they require you to authenticate using their social login only. You can create a new authentication service; we'll call it `NewAuthService` (note, you should not name your services with these terrible names). 

```ts
@Injectable({
  providedIn: 'root'
})
export class NewAuthService {
  public login(): void { /* new way to login */ }
  public logout(): void { /* new way to logout */ }
```

Because both classes have the same public members, you can substitute the original `AuthService` with the new `NewAuthService` by configuring the provider:

```ts
@NgModule({
  imports: // imports here
  declarations: //declarations here
  providers: [
    { provide: AuthService, useClass: NewAuthService }
  ]
})
export class AppModule { }
```

The cool thing about having the same public members is that there's no need to change the consuming code. Angular instantiates a new instance of `NewAuthService` and provides that dependency to consuming code, even if they still refer to `AuthService`!

### Configure providers with `useExisting`

> The `useExisting` option replaces the provider with a different provider already existing within the application.  This option is a great use case for API narrowing, that is, decreasing the surface area of an API. Let's say your language learning application has an API that got out of hand. We'll call this API `LanguageTranslationService`, and it looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `useExisting` option replaces the provider with a different provider already existing within the application.  This option is a great use case for API narrowing, that is, decreasing the surface area of an API. Let's say your language learning application has an API that's gotten out of hand. We'll call this API `LanguageTranslationService`, and it looks like this:
```
using past perfect tense to indicate an ongoing action that started in the past

```ts
@Injectable({
  providedIn: 'root'
})
export const LanguageTranslationService {
  public french(text: string): string { /* translates to French */ }
  public japanese(text: string): string { /* translates to Japanese */ }
  public elvish(text: string): string { /* translates to Elvish */ }
  public klingon(text: string): string { /* translates to Klingon */ }
  // so on and so forth
}
```

And you consume the service like this:

```ts
@Component({
  // standard component metadata here
})
export class ElvishTranslationComponent implements OnInit {
  private elvish!: string;
  constructor(private translationService: LanguageTranslationService) { }
  
  public ngOnInit(): void {
    this.elvish = this.translationService.elvish(someText);
  }
}
```

> Oops... The `LanguageTranslationService` looks a bit unwieldy. Let's narrow the API surface by creating a new class called `FictiousLanguageTranslationService` and move the translation methods for the fictitious languages there. We'll use an abstract class for this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Oops... The `LanguageTranslationService` looks a bit unwieldy. Let's narrow the API surface by creating a new class called `FictitiousLanguageTranslationService` and move the translation methods for the fictitious languages there. We'll use an abstract class for this:
```
since fictious is a fictitious word.... (sorry!) i'm going to edit the class name in the code below also....

```ts

> export abstract class FictiousLanguageTranslationService {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export abstract class FictitiousLanguageTranslationService {
```
changed class name - you'll prob need to change it elsewhere (in the repo?)

  abstract elvish: (text: string) => string;
  abstract klingon: (text: string) => string;
}
```

> Now we can add `FictiousLanguageTranslationService` as a real dependency in the application by adding it to the `providers` array, but use the existing `LanguageTranslationService` implementation of the code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can add `FictitiousLanguageTranslationService` as a real dependency in the application by adding it to the `providers` array, but use the existing `LanguageTranslationService` implementation of the code:
```

```ts
@NgModule({
  imports: // imports here
  declarations: // declarations here
  providers: [

>     { provide: FictiousLanguageTranslationService, useExisting: LanguageTranslationService }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    { provide: FictitiousLanguageTranslationService, useExisting: LanguageTranslationService }
```

  ]
})
export class AppModule { }
```

Now we'll update the consumer to use the new dependency:

```ts
@Component({
  // standard component metadata here
})
export class ElvishTranslationComponent implements OnInit {
  private elvish!: string;

>   constructor(private fltService: FictiousLanguageTranslationService) { }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  constructor(private fltService: FictitiousLanguageTranslationService) { }
```

  
  public ngOnInit(): void {
    this.elvish = this.translationService.elvish(someText);
  }
}
```

> Only the methods defined in the `FictiousLanguageTranslationService` are available now. Pretty sweet!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only the methods defined in the `FictitiousLanguageTranslationService` are available now. Pretty sweet!
```

### Configure with `useValue`

> The `useValue` option replaces the provider with a value. This option is a great use case for values such as configurations and mocking services in automated tests where you need to control the inputs and outputs. Let's go back to the `BREAD_TOKEN` in this example and override it to show a 🥐(croissant) instead. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `useValue` option replaces the provider with a value. This option is a great use case for values such as configurations and mocking services in automated tests where you need to control the inputs and outputs. Let's go back to the `BREAD_TOKEN` in this example and override it to show a 🥐 (croissant) instead. 
```

We can override the token:

```ts
@NgModule({
  imports: // imports here
  declarations: // declarations here
  providers: [
    { provide: BREAD_TOKEN, useValue: '🥐' }
  ]
})
export class AppModule { }
```

Now when we use this in the `MyBreadComponent` we'll get a croissant instead of a loaf of bread!

```ts
@Component({
  // standard component metadata here
})
export class MyBreadComponent {
  constructor(@Inject(BREAD_TOKEN) private bread: string) { }
}
```

### Configure with `useFactory`

> The `useFactory` option allows us to use a factory method to create a dependency. This option is a great use case if you have dynamic values to consider when creating the dependency. It's also how we can use a [Factory Pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Factory_method_pattern) for creating our dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `useFactory` option allows us to use a factory method to create a dependency. This option is a great use case if you have dynamic values to consider when creating the dependency. It's also how we can use a [factory pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Factory_method_pattern) for creating our dependencies.
```
